
FELTSMAN PRAISED DESPITE IRRITABLE REVIEWER

It’s  interesting to observe how delicate a thing is a cham‐
ber music concert.  The smallest annoyances can mushroom and
ruin  a whole show.  Vladimir Feltsman appeared at Nordstrom
Recital hall in  Seattle  today  as  part  of  the  Amadeus!
Mozart  Festival, playing the 10th piano sonata (C major, K.
330) and, along with string players from  the  Seattle  Sym‐
phony,  the  G  minor  piano  quartet  (K.  487).  After the
intermission we heard Shostakovich’s warhorse E minor  piano
trio.

A  small  thing–a  tiny thing: before the start of the show,
would‐be audience members piled  in  front  of  the  waiting
doors  (the  lady  at the ticket booth had told us the doors
were already open, but it turned out untrue).  By  the  time
the  doors opened two lines had formed for the door near us.
We stood in one, and both lines  wove  through  the  doorway
without  problems.   But when I and my friend arrived at the
door, a sour‐looking usher by the name of Iva stopped us and
told us in no uncertain terms that ‘the line is over there,’
pointing to the end of the other line.  A bit taken aback by
this  (she had let everyone before us through) we got out of
line and found the end of the other line.  Looking  back  we
saw  Iva  immediately  ushering the next people who had been
behind us through just like the people before us.

Silly to become upset.  No doubt a mere mistake on her part.
Childish,  certainly, for me to be still irritated when sit‐
ting down in the auditorium.  She probably  just  volunteers
there, after all.  But still I think perhaps this colored my
take on the music to follow.  How can one  help  it?   These
things  are  important,  they  are  a part of the audience’s
experience and should be controlled, as with any other  ele‐
ment of the performance.

After  we  sat down, the same usher arrived and snapped at a
poor innocent young man that he must remove  his  coat  from
the  seat  next  to him so others could sit there.  The coat
was in fact there to save the space for his friend.  Perhaps
the  request  was  not an unreasonable one, but the delivery
was quite poor and unnecessarily autocratic.

But on to music.  Feltsman led with the Sonata.  This  is  a
lovely  bit of Mozart fluff and his rendering was unimpeach‐
able, particularly the first movement, with all  its  liquid
runs and noodling.  It was, to use Mozart’s own metaphor, as
smooth as oil.  The Steinway grand is a  thunderous  instru‐
ment,  difficult to control in Mozart–it can sometimes sound
a bit like a Siberian tiger in ballet shoes–and  the  second
movement,  with its repeated notes in the bass, occasionally
suffered slightly, but on the whole it went off beautifully;
not too slow, but singing and graceful.  The third is one of
those playfully Mozartian things that  can  really  make  an
audience sit up and take notice.

It  almost  even  made  me  sit up and take notice.  Almost.
Unfortunately it was my fate to sit right next  to  a  woman
who  literally  snored  through the entire performance.  Her
eyes were open, but  she  was  snoring.   Really.   Snoring.
Well,  where does heavy wheezing leave off and light snoring
begin?  In any case, it was terribly distracting.  Why can’t
there be some kind of test for basic control of bodily func‐
tions for people before they are allowed entry to gigs  like
this?   The  man  behind  me, too, kept hacking up something
awful in his throat, gurgling and grunting.

Between the wheezing woman, the rude usher  and  the  emphy‐
semic  man  I  was  really not able to judge the second num‐
ber–the piano quartet.  It was more Mozart,  that  was  cer‐
tain.   Feltsman did nothing worthy of criticism, Mozart did
nothing worthy of applause.   The  string  players–including
Amos  Yang on cello, Maria Larinoff on fiddle and Mara Gear‐
man playing with a lovely, almost  cello‐like  tone  on  the
viola–were clear and professional.  But to use Virgil Thomp‐
son’s phrase, I was much too aware of the passage  of  time.
Why  do they put on these Mozart festivals, anyway?  I can’t
understand why his music is played as  more  than  an  occa‐
sional novelty in this age.  But that is another story.

And,  as it turned out, all was not lost.  During the inter‐
mission we moved to new seats, far from the wheezing  woman.
The  first  three movements of the Shostakovich second piano
trio were a total success–Yang’s work on the cello  particu‐
larly  so.  The Shostakovich is one of the true masterpieces
of the middle 20th  century  and  its  reputation  is  well‐
deserved–and despite some out‐of‐focus rhythms and perhaps a
slightly dramatically flat reading in the  fourth  movement,
the  piece  was one of the most positive musical experiences
this reviewer has had in many months.

To‐do list for those who put on such programs:

First, I know there is little to be done about  the  snoring
woman,  but we do pay a fair amount of money to be there, so
try to encourage a professional demeanor  in  staff.   Small
things  can  have  a  big effect.  Second, even if you think
Mozart is the greatest composer  who  ever  lived,  remember
that he is not the only composer who ever lived.  And third,
please, please bring people like Feltsman and works like the
Shostakovich back just as often as you like.

      Evans Winner
      Seattle, Washington
      January, 2006

