BAD  KITTY‐CAT!  – “GARFIELD: THE MOVIE”
[spoilers]

Garfield: The Movie writers  Joel  Cohen
and  Alec  Sokolow  put  themselves in a
bind with their 2004 adaptation  of  Jim
Davis’  classic  comic strip.  Like most
Sunday comics, Davis’ is  really  geared
toward  adults, not children–emphasizing
Jon’s pathetic attempts  at  womanizing,
Odie’s  mindlessness and Garfield’s mor‐
bid self‐absorption.  The script,  based
on  Davis’  1982  TV  special Here Comes
Garfield, seems on the one hand to  want
to be a hero‐saves‐the‐day kiddie flick,
and on the other to appeal to the  adult
fans  of  the  original  comic about the
amoral,  definitely  not  child‐friendly
cat.

Their solution reads is as if they wrote
the first half for the fans, the  second
for  the tots.  The beginning is largely
a series of pegs for running  gags  from
the  comic.   Important  exposition does
happen here, but  gets  overshadowed  by
the  predictable  inside jokes, the one‐
liners  about  lasagna  and   Garfield’s
mean‐spirited  antics–all  toned down by
the need to keep it nicey‐nice  for  the
kids.

Excellent  casting can’t make up for the
writing.  I initially  didn’t  recognize
Breckin  Meyer  as  the face that played
skater‐punk Travis Birkenstock in  Clue‐
less (1995), which I generally take as a
sign of ability in an actor.  He does  a
great  job  with what little the writers
give him,  portraying  lonely,  socially
inept  pet owner Jon Arbuckle.  Arbuckle
uses Garfield as an excuse to see  beau‐
tiful  veterinarian,  Liz (Jennifer Love
Hewitt).  Liz asks Jon to  adopt  a  new
puppy,  Odie.   But  when smarmy TV show
host Happy Chapman (Stephen  Tobolowsky;
Sneakers)  sees Odie’s talent for enter‐
taining (“dancing” on his hind legs)  he
figures  it’s his ticket to the big time
and contrives to dognap the  pooch.   In
the second half of the film, Garfield, a
CGI animation with  the  voice  of  Bill
Murray  (a  wasted stroke of casting ge‐
nius),   ceases   to   be   recognizably
Garfield in spirit, uncharacteristically
throwing rotten to the wind in favor  of
a quest to rescue the missing dog.

Nor does the well‐crafted animation make
up for the writing.  Use of CGI to  give
human‐like facial expressions to animals
used to be  nothing  short  of  phantas‐
magoric  in  its  early uses in pet food
ads.  Animators have thankfully  learned
to  tone  it  down a bit, resulting in a
more subtle effect  here.   The  initial
shock   of  a  completely  CGI  Garfield
standing next to live action animals and
people  wears  off quickly; obvious care
was put into rendering the cat’s ungain‐
ly  movements  with stylized verisimili‐
tude.

Nor do the competent music and directing
outweigh     the    writing    problems.
Christophe  Beck’s  score  is  post‐John
Williams  (which  means  post‐Prokofiev)
wallpaper, but  effectively  so.   Peter
Hewitt’s  directing is workaday–it looks
as if it was really made with the  tele‐
vision  screen  in  mind, but is free of
major faults.

The script shows by its absence the val‐
ue that a single, unified premise brings
to a film.   The  characterizations  are
confused  and  contradictory.   The  fat
cat’s appeals to the value of friendship
in  the  second half ring hollow, coming
as they do from  him.   “Now’s  not  the
time  for  a plate of meatloaf–now’s the
time for a plate of courage,”  he  quips
in  a  lame excuse for his random change
of heart from unsympathetic antihero  to
self‐sacrificing  Walt  Disney cat.  The
script comes off as one written by  com‐
mittee  as,  in  effect, it was.  Though
there are some nice  touches  and  funny
moments,  by trying to fence‐sit between
being an  adult  homage  to  Jim  Davis’
original and a babysitter film for kids,
the result winds up insulting to fans of
the  former  and dully inappropriate for
the latter.
 Evans Winner
 Seattle Washington
 December, 2004

References:

The     Internet     Movie     Database,
http://imdb.com;  entries on Joel Cohen,
Garfield (2004),  Here  Comes  Garfield,
Breckin Meyer, Alec Sokolow, Stephen To‐
bolowsky.

