Opinion About the Proposed ‘’CLosing’’of
humanities.philosophy.objectivism

[Lightly edited, 2023]

I am not a regular contributor  to  this
newsgroup,  but  I  would prefer that it
not be closed down.  The charter for hu-
manities.philosophy.objectivism  (h.p.o)
states that “[d]iscussion on h.p.o.  may
consist  of  attempts to support, elabo-
rate, apply,  question,  or  refute  the
tenets  of Objectivist philosophy on the
part of participants” and that  “[t]hose
who  disagree  with  these  ideas may of
course also post to h.p.o.  for the pur-
poses of civilized debate and discussion
of  Objectivism.”[1]  Thus,  given   the
original  intent  of  the forum, you are
asking that h.p.o be  run  in  a  manner
contrary  to its design, for your conve-
nience.

As for fora on the web, while I am sure-
ly  not  aware  of all the web sites for
the discussion of Objectivism  you  men-
tion,  most, if not all those of which I
am aware place ideological limits on the
content  of  contributors’ posts.  While
some such fora may be interesting  occa-
sionally  for  passive  reading, or even
useful as pedagogical tools (though that
is   questionable),  under  few  circum-
stances would I want  to  actively  con-
tribute,  because  in such fora free in-
tellectual discussion is by  design  im-
possible: if the dices are loaded–if the
rules say,  yes,  you  can  discuss  Ayn
Rand’s  ideas, but only if you don’t say
anything too out of line–then  you  have
agreed  in  advance  that some arguments
are lost before they  have  started–that
there  are some subject that are forbid-
den regardless of truth.  You have  cre-
ated  a  system in which rational, adult
conversation is in principle impossible.

As has already been pointed out, if  you
don’t  like  h.p.o,  you are free not to
read it.  But, despite the fact that you
are  right–most  of  the content here is
rubbish–it is also  the  last  place  of
which  I  am  aware that encourages free
discussion of Ayn Rand’s ideas with only
social  pressure,  argumentative  power,
and (at least in theory) moderation  for
blatantly  uncivilized  behavior  as the
means of maintaining  the  “intellectual
purity”   you   appear   to  desire.   I
wouldn’t trade it for a thousand “objec-
tivismonline.net”s.

There  is  of course no reason why those
who want to  manage  or  participate  in
such  fora shouldn’t be able to do so if
they want, and by  any  rules  they  can
dream  up.  But it is a mistake to think
that such places allow  adults  to  have
rational   intellectual   conversations.
They  are,  in  my  opinion,   primarily
places  where those with little true in-
tellectual self-confidence can engage in
mutual  pack-pattery–and  sport  in  the
abuse of new contributors.   Personally,
I am too proud to post to a web forum in
which my words are subject to the  whims
of  some  snot-nosed college student who
read Atlas Shrugged once.  If the  users
of  online  Objectivist  fora truly have
the wit, let them come here in the  full
gladiatorial light of day and make their
cases, and let them face  the  brunt  of
real attack from those who need not fear
secret moderatorial reprisal.  Let  them
step up and, as they say, pet the pony.
 Evans Winner
 Albuquerque, New Mexico
 January 8, 2008

Footnotes:

[1] See the h.p.o charter at
http://www.kill-
file.org/~tskirvin/hpo/hpo.charter

