One Space or Two

[Originally    posted   on   ttlaxia.net
[2012-09-28 Fri]

There seems  to  be  an  eternal  debate
among  writers (and those who hate them)
about the relative merits  of  inserting
one  space  or  two  between  sentences.
(See, Mark Barrett’s blog  post  for  an
interesting  and  unusually  even-keeled
example.)  The question itself  is  mis-
leading  in  every sense, but to the ex-
tent that it is a  meaningful  one,  the
answer  will come by asking what, exact-
ly, is at stake in the issue.  There are
several   possibilities,  including  the
sanity of publishing editors, the  tired
fingers  of authors, the beauty of docu-
ments, or the ease  with  which  we  use
those  documents.  The future of Western
Civilization may not be at stake in  the
sense that if we today omit to insert an
extra space after  our  full  stops,  we
shall  surely  be  shoveling babies into
ovens  tomorrow;  but  somebody   thinks
something  is  at stake—else why all the
vitriol?

In the realm of computer  programs,  the
desiderata for an editor of text are, as
the programmers would put it, orthogonal
to  those for a typesetter of text.  At-
tempts at integrating the two  functions
into  a  single,  graphical program have
produced mongrels like  Microsoft  Word,
and  OpenOffice  Writer,  which  perform
neither function well.  For example, one
may  examine texts rendered by such pro-
grams side-by-side, justified  and  not,
and conclude, as Barrett does, that jus-
tification produces undesirable  spacing
byproducts,  particularly  when sentence
ends are double-spaced; but the compari-
son  tells  us only that the typesetting
engines used are unable to intelligently
hyphenate.   Hyphenation is not merely a
minor side issue, but is critical to any
proper attempt at justified typesetting,
and for precisely this reason.  One  may
indeed suggest the use of such word-pro-
cessing programs for the quick and  easy
production  of party flyers, but for se-
rious writing, there  is  no  substitute
for a real, professional-grade text edi-
tor; and as for typesetting the  result-
ing  text,  that  is  not the job of the
writer, qua writer, but of a typesetter.
The  two functions may reside in one and
the same person, just as they may reside
in  one  and  the  same computer program
(usually with the same  quality  of  re-
sult)  but they remain nevertheless dis-
tinct functions of the process of bring-
ing text to readers.

Furthermore,  space  is  not a discrete,
but a continuous quantity, as the mathe-
maticians would put it.  A paper-and-ink
document does not contain one,  or  two,
spaces  after  a sentence, but rather it
contains some single quantity of  space,
large  or  small, however produced.  The
notion of reducing this measure  to  the
simple level of one discrete lump or two
stems, as  has  been  pointed  out  many
times,  from  the  Age of Mechanization;
but if the secretarial  poolies  of  old
found  themselves resorting to the expe-
dient of adding an extra space  after  a
sentence,  it  is premature to leave the
issue at that, with a dismissive wave of
the  hand.  An extra keystroke after ev-
ery sentence is, if nothing else,  inef-
ficient;  and if there is anything which
a  professional  typist  abhors,  it  is
waste.   We  must  ask therefore why the
habit was formed and reinforced  despite
the  added  effort; and the answer is of
course that in its crude way, the inser-
tion  of  an extra space character simu-
lated the extra space which the  typists
were  used  to  seeing in actual typeset
material.

About such material one gathers  several
things: first, that in the modern world,
the habit of adding a little extra space
after  a  sentence-end  has waned.  Per-
haps, as the Marxists will no-doubt con-
clude,  it  is  because it costs less to
mass-produce material which  packs  more
into  a  smaller  space—whitespace costs
money; perhaps it is  because  an  algo-
rithm  which  can  intelligently account
for all the interbalanced and  sometimes
conflicting  factors  involved  in  real
typesetting is devilishly  difficult  to
write,  and  therefore expensive to pro-
duce and complex and difficult to  learn
to use—and if there is one thing few but
engineers seem to want, it is  to  learn
to  use TeX; or perhaps, as the deterio-
rationists will inevitably conclude,  it
is  simply  because modern man lacks the
sophistication of taste of which his no-
ble  ancestor was possessed.  Second, in
older typeset material,  it  seems  that
the habit of adding extra space tends to
be something of an English  (and  there-
fore American) trait.  The Latinate (and
therefore Continental) habit is to space
between sentences as between words.  The
American typists imitated  the  typeset-
ters of their country by adding an extra
space; the French did not;  and  now  we
have  the phrase “French spacing” to de-
note the omission of that second  space.
The argument that double-spacing is only
an accident of the history  of  the  me-
chanical typewriter itself brushes aside
the long history of typesetting with ex-
tra  space  between  sentences which the
English-speaking typists sought to  imi-
tate.

It  is  important  to  realize, however,
that the addition of that extra  spacing
character is, just as I’ve said, an imi-
tation.  It is  a  visual  imitation  of
what is itself, at least in part, a mark
with semantic meaning.  If we choose  to
mark the end of a sentence with the same
sort of space that we use  to  mark  the
space  between  words (a space which it-
self is conventional, as a glance at old
Latin  texts will show) that later space
is  nevertheless  semantically  distinct
from  the  former, because the structure
which  it  distinguishes  is   distinct.
There is no merit in the argument that a
space is a space is a space.  Because  a
sentence is not a word, a sentence space
is not a word space; even when the  cur-
rent  fashion  of typesetting makes them
visually indistinguishable, they  remain
semantically  distinct.   Just as an in-
dentation in printed material  (or  some
less  felicitous  means  in HTML-typeset
material) is used to  differentiate  one
paragraph  from the next, we use certain
marks to set off one sentence  from  the
next.   They  include  capitalizing  the
first letter of the new sentence,  using
a  mark  of punctuation like the period,
and, in some  circumstances,  we  add  a
little  extra  space  between  the  sen-
tences.

This much, in itself, seems an  argument
in  favor  of  the double-spacing habit.
(As an aside,  my  own  text  editor  of
choice,  GNU  Emacs,  makes  use of this
fact by defining a large number of func-
tions whose purpose is to operate on in-
dividual  sentences  as  a  whole.   The
ability,  with  a  single  keystroke, to
move the cursor one sentence at a  time,
to  mark  off  individual  sentences, no
matter how long, or how many lines  they
may  occupy,  is  a  useful and valuable
one; and it is only possible when  those
sentences are distinguished distinctive-
ly; therefore Emacs  treats  two  spaces
following  a sentence-ending punctuation
mark as the  delimiter  of  a  sentence.
Such  functions  could  not work without
such a unique combination to distinguish
a  sentence.)   But of course, it is not
really clarity  in  the  semantic  sense
which  the  proponents of double-spacing
seek, but rather clarity in  the  visual
sense—the  sense  of ease and comfort of
reading.  Indeed, one requires no spaces
whatever  between sentences to make them
semantically clear—that function is  am-
ply fulfilled by the mark of punctuation
and the following capital, mediated by a
little  intelligent  sensitivity to con-
text on the part of  the  reader.   (One
cites Wikipedia advisedly, but according
to that source,  studies  regarding  the
effect  of  end-of-sentence  spacing  on
text comprehension have  been  inconclu-
sive.)

Some  typesetters might claim that extra
spacing makes unsightly gaps in a  text,
and,  if  a  page is looked at as a dead
blob of color on paper, rather than as a
sequence  of  living  ideas expressed in
text, then they are quite right; but  it
remains  debatable  whether such gaps or
rivers through  the  text  distract,  as
some  might claim.  One might argue, af-
ter all, that yes, there is no  evidence
that extra space between sentences makes
text easier to read; but to  argue  that
there  is, in principle, no value in us-
ing some whitespace to make reading eas-
ier and more pleasant commits one to the
same position with regard  to  paragraph
breaks—a  frightful  thought.   You  may
like some extra space between  sentences
in  typeset  material,  as I do, because
those gaps make landmarks  which  render
it  easier  to  sense  where one is in a
block  of  otherwise  unyielding   text.
Quite  arguably,  the visual homogeneity
which is held up as  an  ideal  by  some
typesetters  is  actually a hindrance to
pleasant reading.  There  is  no  really
good  facility in HTML and CSS which al-
lows double-spaced  sentence  ends;  and
there  is  no  point  in  tilting at the
windmill of  the  medium  in  which  one
works.   Editors,  intelligent, enlight-
ened, or otherwise, may demand work done
in  one  way  or the other—another fight
not worth the ink.  A text editing  pro-
gram  may  seem  to  urge one way or the
other; thus.  Furthermore,  if  text  is
fed  into  a typesetting engine, it will
collapse multiple  spaces  into  one—one
which  may  or may not, depending on the
intelligence of  the  program,  and  the
taste of its operator, be larger than an
inter-word   space;   therefore,   other
things being equal, for text intended to
be typeset in any sense at all, it  mat-
ters not one bit how many spaces one us-
es between sentences.  As  for  informal
communications,  such as emails, the an-
swer is that it does not matter precise-
ly  because  the medium is informal; and
as for the use of monospaced  typefaces,
it is true that the double space can ap-
pear excessive in  that  case,  but  the
very  use  of a monospace typeface indi-
cates that we are not discussing serious
typeset  material  — one uses such fonts
now only for writing computer  code  and
for  certain  fanciful  sorts of decora-
tion—not for running text.

So, should you use two  spaces  or  one?
If  you  are  not  actually  typesetting
text, it does not matter, but it doesn’t
hurt,  unless you have reason to suspect
that  it  will  prejudice  your   editor
against  you.  Might it bother your edi-
tor?  Evidently,  it  is  possible.   It
seems  that  people  with  an irrational
prejudice  against  double-spacing   are
more  common  and  more  vitriolic  than
those with a prejudice for.  If you  are
typesetting your text, even for the Web,
then once again, it doesn’t  matter,  as
the typesetting engine will collapse the
extra space into one.  If  someone  com-
plains  that the typeset results contain
those extra spaces, then they are almost
certainly  trying to use a child’s toy—a
word processing program—to do an adult’s
job.   And if your text editor functions
more usefully if  you  do  double-space,
then  it  won’t hurt to do so.  I myself
find that even in a  monospace  typeface
on my text editor’s screen, my own writ-
ing is easier for me to read with double
spaces,  so  I  use them even for my own
manuscripts.  And for an email?   Again,
it  does not matter.  So, if you already
have the habit, there is  little  reason
to reform; and if you don’t, there is no
more reason to change.

The real question, then, has nothing  to
do  with  the typing habits of all those
poor, harassed  writers,  whose  job  is
naught  but  to produce meaningful text,
but with the work of typesetters,  whose
job  is  to render that text—not beauti-
ful, but ergonomic.  It  is  reduced  to
the question of whether serious, typeset
running text (not merely authors’  manu-
scripts) should be set with—no, not “two
spaces,” but with a  little  more  space
kerned  in  between  sentences.  One may
point to history and find that it’s been
done both ways for a long time.  One may
point to  science  and  find  little  to
prove one way or the other.

But does this mean that the issue is en-
tirely subjective?   Perhaps  not.   The
desire  to eradicate the visual distinc-
tion between words and  phrases  on  the
one  hand,  and sentences, on the other,
implies a desire, or a least a  willing-
ness  (even if born only of insensitivi-
ty) to eradicate the  semantic  distinc-
tion.   If  the  implication  of  the “a
space is a space” argument is that words
and clauses and phrases are no different
from sentences;  then  what  may  be  at
stake,  albeit  in  a very small way, is
the appreciation our culture has for the
importance—the  vital  importance—of the
concept of the sentence itself, as prop-
erly  not more and no less than the com-
plete expression of a complete  thought.
I  admit  that  the connection is slight
and tenuous; nevertheless one might  in-
deed see the tendency to lose the graph-
ical distinction between a  sentence-end
and  a  phrase-end  as  symptomatic of a
general insensitivity to the distinction
between  the  two kinds of structure, as
another effect of the same  cause  which
is  behind the general atomization which
seems to have taken hold of modern writ-
ing.   The  atomization of sentences im-
plies the atomization of thought.   What
once might have been written as a single
flowing  sentence  consisting  of  clear
premises followed by a conclusion is now
replaced with the machine-gun stutter of
seemingly  unrelated assertions.  No, we
will not all die tomorrow  if  we  allow
ourselves  to  habitually begin our sen-
tences with the word but;  but  that  we
live  in  a  culture  which has lost the
sense of why such a thing might be infe-
licitous  in many contexts is indication
that the sense of a  sentence  has  been
largely lost.  Perhaps then that, if not
proves, at any  rate  may  explain  some
prejudice   against  the  single-spacing
habit, even where  we  might  all  admit
that it is, after all, not really an im-
portant issue in itself.
 E. Hawthorne Winner
 Albuquerque, New Mexico
 August, 2012

