
i# STEAL THIS CD

In my day‐job, clerking in the music department of
a large, chain bookstore, it is often my  duty  to
flip,  compact  disc  by compact disc, through our
inventory, in search of the small magnetic  stick‐
ers the company affixes to the recordings as theft
preventers.  Found cut from the  packaging  cello‐
phane and wadded between disks, they are the tell‐
tale sign of an attempt to  steal  the  disk  from
which  they came.  They are a record (evidence, if
you will) of the musical tastes of the  larcenous‐
ly‐inclined segment of our population.

Most are stickers for the music of popular rap mu‐
sic acts, like  Eminem  or  The  Black‐Eyed  Peas.
Perhaps,  then,  there  is some degree of truth to
the reputation such music enjoys as a  breeder  of
anger, hatred, gangsterism, theft, the smacking up
of ’ho’s and the busting of caps.

Perhaps.  But today, wadded up and tucked  out  of
the  way  somewhere in the Rachmaninoff section, I
found the security sticker  for  Morton  Feldman’s
‘Patterns  in a Chromatic Field’ for cello and pi‐
ano.

I’m not making this up.

Certainly, it is more than possible that the  evi‐
dent theft of one one of the most anemic, listless
pieces of music of all time, by one  of  the  most
emphatically  un‐hip  composers  of all time could
have been a mere mistake; a crime  of  opportunity
committed  by  the  ignorant.   Won’t the would‐be
criminal be surprised to hear the results  of  the
theft?–

–just...  one...  note...  at a...  time.

But–and  perhaps I’m being sentimental–I prefer to
think that someone walked into that store with one
thing  on  their mind: “I’m gonna snag me some su‐
per‐concentrated,   post‐expressionist   uber‐mod‐
ernism.”

And  as  much  as  I by‐and‐large can’t stand more
than five minutes of Feldman’s music at a time, it
does my heart good to think someone could be will‐
ing to go to that length to listen to it.  Because
it means someone still cares about serious music.

If  no  one riots at premiers anymore, as they fa‐
mously did in the earliest part of the 20th centu‐
ry, perhaps they can at least steal Morton Feldman
CDs.

It’s a start, at any rate.
 Evans Winner
 Seattle, Washington
 December, 2005

