MUSIC  FOR TOY PIANO Cornish College here in Seat‐
tle was able to bring us a program of the music of
Cornish  favorite  son,  John Cage, and others, in
PONCHO Concert Hall last night.  The extraordinary
Margret  Leng  Tan  was  the lone performer of the
evening.  Tan  is  an  accomplished  (the  program
notes  bill  her as the ‘foremost’) interpreter of
Cage’s early prepared piano music and now special‐
izes  in  the small but interesting repertoire for
toy piano; Cage’s ‘Suite for Toy  Piano’  was  the
main musical prize of the evening.

The  performance  began  with  a  very  short film
called WORXOK by  someone  simply  named  Trimpin,
with  the bell‐like sounds of toy piano for accom‐
paniment.  Someone appeared to hold some  kind  of
screen  in front of the projector lens to create a
diffuse visual effect.  Shots passed of dogs,  and
of  old women grooming themselves.  The effect was
somewhat mystifying, though the music  was  pleas‐
ant.

After  the  film,  Tan  took the stage, clad in an
aqua, Chinese‐cut blouse, and played  Cage’s  1940
‘Bacchanale’ for prepared piano–famed as the first
such work, and first performed right there in PON‐
CHO  Hall as accompaniment to a Syvilla Fort dance
number.  Tan, here on spiritual home turf,  played
with the casual ease of a student alone in a prac‐
tice room.

As with much early Cage, the piece substitutes for
a lack of harmonic interest with drum pattern‐like
ostinati.  The effect is  successful  in  general,
though  the  preparation  of the piano necessarily
reduces, quite substantially, the dynamic range of
the  instrument, and thus makes more difficult the
task of producing a convincing climax–a noticeable
failure  in  the  ‘Bacchanale’ through no fault of
its interpreter.  Yet compared  to  Cage’s  later,
far  more  ‘avant’ works, it is the early prepared
piano pieces that are aging best, and for which he
will likely be remembered longest.

Tan  plays  in  what I call the Juilliard style of
modern pianism–something difficult to define,  but
characterized  by  a too‐dry, too‐articulated, too
emphasized approach to the  playing  of  runs  and
other  fast figurations; something mechanical, and
a tendency to atomize long  musical  phrases  into
short,  three  or  four‐note  units.   It  is,  of
course, not limited to alumnus of that school, but
I  have  come  to associate it with Juilliard.  In
Tan’s case, it may come from all the  practice  on
the  toy  piano,  which requires a very deliberate
touch.  Her ear for sonority, however, is  wonder‐
ful.   She was perfectly made to play the music of
such composers as Cage and Crumb,  who  specialize
in timbral subtlety.

The Suite for Toy Piano, in five short movements–a
centerpiece of  Tan’s  repertoire–was  great  fun.
One  movement  employs  an idea in which each hand
plays a mirror image of the other; a  final  move‐
ment  gives  the  audience one of the only conven‐
tionally tuneful moments in Cage’s entire oeuvre.

Of the remaining works, all receiving their  Seat‐
tle  premiers,  first was a Toby Twinning arrange‐
ment for toy piano of  the  Beatles  tune  Eleanor
Rigby.   The  arrangement  is heavy‐handed for the
tiny piano–with the loud noise of its  action  and
the  complexity  of  its metallic sound, the spare
textures of the Cage come off, where the  Romantic
density  of the Twinning work approaches undiffer‐
entiated noise.  This noise and the dynamic limits
of  the  instrument remind one of harpsichord, and
one thinks that the solution  of  the  Renaissance
composers–counterpoint,  rather  than harmonic in‐
terest and density–might serve the instrument bet‐
ter.

Next was ‘Chooks’ from ‘Old McDonald’s Yellow Sub‐
marine’ by Erik Griswold.  The  short,  fun  piece
uses  fast, open chords on the toy piano alternat‐
ing with quick hits to the woodblocks; simple  and
crowd‐pleasing.  Next a tarantella: ‘Mirabella’ by
Stephen Montague.  Again, the work is too  densely
chordal  to  sound  on  the noisy instrument.  The
harmonies are Italio‐Spanish modal standard.   The
piece  is  essentially a showpiece and as such has
some nice moments, the final bars particularly.

Last we hear Twinning’s 1995 ‘Satie Blues’ for pi‐
ano  and  toy  piano, played by one performer, one
hand on each instrument.  The work is a melancholy
meditation  with  toy  piano  generally taking the
lead, and ‘adult’ piano (as Ms. Tan calls  it)  in
accompaniment.  Mr. Twinning seems to be a compos‐
er somewhat in the modern  Hollywood  mold.   Mild
triadic  modal harmonies succeed one another under
pleasantly  evocative  tunes.   Less   successful,
though, was his attempt to use tremolo passages on
the toy piano as transitional material, which gave
a  jarringly clangorous effect.  The work was per‐
haps the most conventionally pleasing work of  the
evening, though a bit of a downer to end on.

After  Tan’s show we watched Evans Chan’s documen‐
tary, ‘Sorceress of the New Piano: The Artistry of
Margaret  Leng  Tan’–an  occasionally  interesting
two‐hour commercial for  the  performer.   But  if
that’s  what  it  takes to bring such artists here
from New York to play such interesting repertoire,
then  I for one am willing to sit through the com‐
mercial.  The Seattle Weekly ran a kind of running
gag  throughout  its classical event listings this
week about the presence of Mozart  on  nearly  all
the  programs.  A sadly valid observation, but one
not applicable to this event–consisting as it  did
of only one dead composer, who died less than fif‐
teen years ago, and the rest still alive and kick‐
ing.   So general kudos to Cornish and to Margaret
Tan.
 Evans Winner
 Seattle Washington
 January, 2006

